REFERENCES:

1. 10 CFR § 50.54 (k)
  An operator or senior reactor operator licensed pursuant to part 55 of this chapter shall be present at the controls at all times during the operation of the facility

2. 10 CFR 50.54 (j)
  Apparatus and mechanisms other than controls, the operation of which may affect the reactivity or power level of a reactor shall be manipulated only with the knowledge and consent of an operator or senior operator licensed pursuant to part 55 of this chapter present at the controls.

3. IE Circular 81-02
  The following conditions and practices are among those the NRC believes to be necessary for the maintenance of a professional atmosphere in the control room and throughout the facility  
    1. All on-duty NRC-licensed operators and operating supervisors must be
      aware of and responsible for the plant status at all times. This
      includes supervisors being responsible for the performance of all
      personnel assigned to their shift who could affect plant safety,
      regardless of specialty affiliation. Knowledge of the plant's
      status must be assured during shift changes by a formal watch
      turnover and relief.
    2. All on-duty NRC-licensed operators must be alert, remain within their
      immediate areas of responsibility until properly relieved, and be
      particularly attentive to the instrumentation and controls located
      within these areas at all times.
    3. Potentially distracting activities in the control room and other watch
      stations must be prohibited (for example: radios, TV, alcohol use or
      drug abuse, games, horseplay, hobbies, and reading that is not directly
      job related).
    4. Control room access must be limited to those persons on official
      business only and loitering in this area must be prohibited.
    5. All necessary plant-related technical / administrative control room
      business must be conducted at a location and in such a manner that
      neither licensed control room operator attentiveness nor the professional
      atmosphere will be compromised. This includes activities associated with
      the use of special eating and training facilities for on-shift personnel.

4. US NRC Regulatory Guide 1.114 2.3
  The senior operator should have the flexibility to move periodically for a brief time to other parts
  of the control room, as long as the senior operator is at all times within the control room vital area
  and meets either of the following conditions.
  a. The senior operator can see or hear the reactor operator at the controls.
  b. The senior operator can hear the control room annunciators.

5. Effects of Sound Interventions on the Mental Stress Response in Adults: Scoping Review PMCID PMC11976171
  The findings suggest that music, especially classical and self-selected pieces, effectively reduces physiological 
  stress markers, including cortisol levels, heart rate variability, and blood pressure. Nonmusical sounds, such as 
  nature sounds and calming voices, also demonstrate potential for stress relief, although research in this area remains limited. 
  While most sound interventions showed positive effects, some studies reported adverse effects, 
  indicating that sound can both alleviate and induce stress. 
  The outcomes were substantially affected by contextual factors such as personal preferences, delivery methods, 
  cultural context, and emphasizing the importance of personalized interventions.

TOPICS FOR DISCUSSION:

Requesting an exemption from the guidance of IE Circular 81-02 Item 3,
Clarification of 10 CFR 50.54 (j) "Apparatus and mechanisms [...] shall be manipulated only with the knowledge and consent of an operator or senior operator licensed [...] at the controls"

ARGUMENTS FOR ADDITION OF RADIO IN THE VOGATAYA CONTROL ROOM:

1. According to [Reference 5], music effectively reduces physiological stress markers including cortisol levels,
  heart rate variability, and blood pressure.

  Which in turn, can help prevent operators from having health issues as a result of the stress during transients.
  Radios however, must be turned off during emergency conditions, startups, or shut downs.

2. Radios will be kept on a volume lower than that of the annunciation panels and plant communication devices, 
  such as the Plant Messaging System or speakers installed at various locations around the facility.

3. Radios must be playing music from a preapproved selection determined to meet the following conditions
    - Music must not contain any vocals 
    - Music must not exceed 70 decibels peak and 60 decibels average in volume on the preapproved radio
    - Music must produce calming effects (which will be determined by plant management)
    - Music must be deemed to be nondistracting (which will be determined by plant management)

4. Music in the control room can help prevent operators from getting bored and falling asleep
  during their assigned shifts, as happened before and mentioned in a communication letter
  from Monticello Nuclear Generating Plant (Letter 8610240322 861020)

5. Radios must be turned off during the following conditions
    - During a plant startup or shut down
    - During shift turnovers
    - During critical communications 
    - During testing which require heightened verbal coordination

ARGUMENTS AGAINST THE ADDITION OF RADIO IN THE VOGATAYA CONTROL ROOM:

1. Could pose as a distraction from monitoring tasks.

2. Certain frequencies can mask the sound of annunciators or an electrical failure.

3. The music played could pose the opposite purpose, causing operators to fall asleep
  rather than keeping them alert.

4. Could add an extra step to procedures of turning off the radio during emergencies, distracting
  operators from the task of ensuring plant safety.

5. Can add additional cognitive load in which operators will be able to hear the music
  while it's playing

NOTES:
This change can initially be put on a controlled trial where InterATOM POWER and NRC Staff can 
monitor the performance of operations and determine any impact on alarm and transient response, 
and communications, along with collecting feedback from plant personnel.
